.. _preface:

Preface
=======

.. _Mozart Effect: http://parenting-baby.com/Parenting-Baby-Music-Research/Music-Research.html

*This is the best book ever written on how to practice at the piano!* The
revelation of this book is that there are highly efficient practice methods
that can accelerate your learning rate, by up to 1,000 times if you have not
yet learned the most efficient practice methods (see :ref:`IV.5`). What is
surprising is that, although these methods were known since the earliest days
of piano, they were seldom taught because only a few teachers knew about them
and these knowledgeable teachers never bothered to disseminate this knowledge.

I realized in the 1960s that there was no good book on how to practice at the
piano. The best I could find was Whiteside's book, which was an utter
disappointment; see my review of this book in References. As a graduate student
at Cornell University, studying until 2 AM just to keep up with some of the
brightest students from all over the world, I had little time to practice
piano. I needed to know what the best practice methods were, especially because
whatever I was using wasn't working although I had taken piano lessons
diligently for 7 years in my youth. How concert pianists could play the way
they did was an absolute mystery to me. Was it just a matter of sufficient
effort, time, and talent, as most people seem to think? If the answer were
"Yes", it would have been devastating for me because it meant that my musical
talent level was so low that I was a hopeless case because I had put in
sufficient effort and time, at least in my youth, practicing up to 8 hours a
day on weekends.

The answers came to me gradually in the 1970's when I noticed that our two
daughters' piano teacher was teaching some surprisingly efficient methods of
practice that were different from methods taught by the majority of piano
teachers. Over a period of more than 10 years, I kept track of these efficient
practice methods and came to the realization that the most important factor for
learning to play the piano is the *practice methods.* Effort, time, and talent
were merely secondary factors! In fact, "talent" is difficult to define and
impossible to measure; it had become a meaningless word we use to hide our
ignorance of the true definition of effective talent. In fact, *proper practice
methods can make practically anybody into a "talented" musician!* I saw this
happen all the time at the hundreds of student recitals and piano competitions
that I had witnessed.

There is now a growing realization that “talent”, “prodigy”, or “genius” is
more created than born (see Olson) -- Mozart is possibly the most prominent
example of the "`Mozart Effect`_". Some have renamed this "The Beethoven
Effect" which might be more appropriate because Mozart had some personality
weaknesses, etc., that sometimes marred his otherwise glorious music, whereas
psychologically, Beethoven composed the most enlightening music. Listening to
music is only one component of the complex Mozart Effect. For pianists, making
music has a larger effect on mental development. Thus good practice methods
will not only accelerate the learning rate but also help to develop the musical
brain, as well as raise the intelligence level, especially for the young. The
learning rate is accelerated, compared to the slower methods (it's like the
difference between an accelerating vehicle and one going at a constant speed).
Therefore, in a matter of a few years, students without proper practice methods
will fall hopelessly behind. This makes those students with good practice
methods appear far more talented than they really are because they can learn in
minutes or days what it takes the others months or years. The most important
aspect of learning piano is brain development and higher intelligence. Memory
is a component of intelligence and we know how to improve memory (see
:ref:`III.6`).  This book also teaches how to play music in our minds – this is
called Mental Play (:ref:`II.12`), which naturally leads to absolute pitch and
the ability to compose music. These are the skills that distinguished the
greatest musicians and led us to label them as geniuses; yet we show here that
they are not difficult to learn. Until now, the musician’s world was restricted
to the few “gifted” artists; we now know that it is a universe in which we can
all participate.

Practice methods can make the difference between a lifetime of futility, and a
concert pianist in less than 10 years for young, dedicated students. Using the
right practice methods, it takes only a few years for a diligent student at any
age to start playing meaningful pieces from famous composers. The saddest truth
of the past two centuries has been that, although most of these practice
methods were discovered and rediscovered thousands of times, they were never
documented and students either had to rediscover them by themselves or, if
lucky, learn them from teachers who knew some of them. The best example of this
lack of documentation is the "teachings" of Franz Liszt. There are a dozen
Franz Liszt societies and they have produced hundreds of publications. Numerous
books have been written about Liszt (see Eigeldinger, etc., in References), and
thousands of teachers have claimed to teach the "Franz Liszt method", complete
with documented teaching lineages. Yet there is not one publication that
describes what that method is! There are endless accounts of Liszt's
accomplishments and technical prowess, yet there is not one reference on the
details of how he got that way. Evidence in the literature indicates that even
Liszt could not describe how he acquired technique; he could only demonstrate
how he played. Since piano pedagogy has succeeded in losing track of how the
greatest pianist acquired his technique, it is little wonder that we did not
have a textbook on learning piano. Can you imagine learning math, economics,
physics, history, biology, or anything else without a textbook, and (if you are
lucky) only your teacher's memory as a guide? Without textbooks and
documentation, our civilization would not have advanced beyond that of jungle
tribes whose knowledge base had been passed on by word of mouth. That's
basically where piano pedagogy has been for 200 years!

There are many books on learning piano (see References), but none of them
qualify as textbooks for practice methods, which is what students need. These
books tell you what skills you need (scales, arpeggios, trills, etc.) and the
more advanced books describe the fingerings, hand positions, movements, etc.,
to play them, but none of them provide a reasonably complete, systematic set of
instructions on how to practice. Most beginner music books provide a few such
instructions, but many of those instructions are wrong -- a good example is the
amateurish advertisement on how to become “The Virtuoso Pianist in 60
Exercises" in the title of the Hanon exercises (see :ref:`III.7.h`). In piano
pedagogy, the most essential tool for the teacher and the student – a
reasonably complete set of instructions on how to practice, had been missing
until this book was written.

I did not realize how revolutionary the methods of this book were until after I
finished my first draft of this book in 1994. These methods were better than
what I had been using previously and, for years, I had been applying them with
good, but not remarkable, results. I experienced my first awakening after
finishing that book, when I really read my own book and followed the methods
systematically -- and experienced their incredible efficiency. So, what was the
difference between knowing parts of the method and reading a book? In writing
the book, I had to take the various parts and arrange them into an organized
structure that served a specific purpose and that had no missing essential
components. As a scientist, I knew that organizing the material into a logical
structure was the only way to write a useful manual. It is well known in
science that most discoveries are made while writing the research reports, not
when conducting the research. It was as if I had most the parts of a terrific
car, but without a mechanic to assemble the car, find any missing parts, and
tune it up, those parts weren't much good for transportation. I became
convinced of this book’s potential to revolutionize piano teaching and, in
1999, decided to provide it free to the world on the internet. In this way, it
could be updated as my research progressed and whatever was written would be
immediately available to the public. In retrospect, this book is the
culmination of over 50 years of research that I had conducted on piano practice
methods since my first piano lessons.

Why are these practice methods so revolutionary? For detailed answers, you will
have to read this book. Here, I briefly present a few overviews of how these
miraculous results are achieved and to explain why they work. I did not
originate most of the basic ideas in this book. They were invented and
re-invented umpteen times in the last 200 years by every successful pianist;
otherwise, they would not have had such success. The basic framework for this
book was constructed using the teachings of Mlle. Yvonne Combe, the teacher of
our two daughters who became accomplished pianists (they have won many first
prizes in piano competitions and averaged over 10 recitals a year each for many
years; both have absolute pitch, and now enjoy composing music). Other parts of
this book were assembled from the literature and my research using the
internet. My contributions are in gathering these ideas, organizing them into a
structure, and providing some understanding of why they work. This
understanding is critical for the success of the method. Piano has often been
taught like religion: Faith, Hope, and Charity. Faith that, if you followed
procedures suggested by a "master" teacher, you will succeed; Hope that,
"practice, practice, practice" will lead you to the rainbow, and Charity that
your sacrifices and paying your dues will perform miracles. This book is
different – a method is not acceptable unless the students understand why it
works so that they can adapt it to their specific needs. Finding the correct
understanding is not easy because you can't just pluck an explanation out of
thin air (it will be wrong) -- you must have enough expertise in that field of
knowledge in order to arrive at the correct explanation. Providing a correct
explanation automatically filters out the wrong methods. This may explain why
even experienced piano teachers, whose educations were narrowly concentrated in
music, can have difficulty in providing the proper understanding and will
frequently give wrong explanations for even correct procedures. In this regard,
my career/educational background in industrial problem solving, materials
science (metals, semiconductors, insulators), optics, acoustics, physics,
electronics, chemistry, scientific reporting (I have published over 100
peer-reviewed articles in major scientific journals and have been granted 6
patents), etc., have been invaluable for producing this book. These diverse
requirements might explain why nobody else was able to write this type of book.
As a scientist, I have agonized over how to concisely define “science” and
argued endlessly over this definition with other scientists and non-scientists.
Because the scientific approach is so basic to this book, I have included a
section on :ref:`IV.2`. Science is not just the theoretical world of the
brightest geniuses; it is the most effective way to simplify our lives. We need
geniuses to advance science; however, once developed, it is the masses that
benefit from these advances.

What are some of these magical ideas that are supposed to revolutionize piano
teaching? Let's start with the fact that, when you watch famous pianists
perform, they may be playing incredibly difficult things, but they make them
look easy. How do they do that? Fact is, they are easy for them! Therefore,
many of the learning tricks discussed here are methods for making difficult
things easy: not only easy, but often trivially simple. This is accomplished by
practicing the two hands separately and by picking short sections to practice,
sometimes down to only one or two notes. You can't make things any simpler than
that! Accomplished pianists can also play incredibly fast -- how do we practice
to be able to play fast? Simple! By using the "chord attack" (:ref:`II.9`).
Thus one key to the success of the methods discussed here is the use of
ingenious learning tricks that are needed to solve specific problems.

Even with the methods described here, it may be necessary to practice difficult
passages hundreds of times and, once in a while, up to 10,000 times before you
can play the most difficult passages with ease. Now if you were to practice a
Beethoven Sonata at, say, half speed (you are just learning it), it would take
about an hour to play through. Therefore, repeating it 10,000 times would take
30 years, or almost half a lifetime, if you had, say, one hour per day to
practice and practiced only this sonata 7 days a week. Clearly, this is not the
way to learn the sonata, although many students use practice methods not too
different from it. This book describes methods for identifying just the few
notes that you need to practice and then playing them in a fraction of a
second, so that you can repeat them 10,000 times in a few weeks (or even days
for easier material), practicing them for only about 10 minutes per day, 5 days
per week – we have reduced the practice time from half a lifetime to a few
weeks.

This book discusses many more efficiency principles, such as practicing and
memorizing at the same time. During practice, each passage must be repeated
many times and repetition is the best way to memorize; therefore, it doesn't
make sense not to memorize while practicing, especially because this turns out
to be the fastest way to learn. Have you ever wondered how every concert
pianist can memorize hours of repertoire? The answer is quite simple. Studies
with super memorizers (such a those who can memorize pages of phone numbers)
have revealed that they are able to memorize because they have developed memory
algorithms onto which they can quickly map the material to be memorized. For
pianists, music is such an algorithm! You can prove this by asking a pianist to
memorize just one page of random notes, and to remember them for years. This is
impossible (without an algorithm) although this pianist may have no trouble
memorizing several 20 page Beethoven *Sonatas*, and still play them 10 years
later. Thus what we thought was a special talent of concert pianists turns out
to be something anyone can do. Students who use the methods of this book
memorize and perform everything they learn, except when practicing sight
reading. This is why this book does not recommend exercises such as Hanon and
Czerny, that are not meant to be performed; by the same token, the Chopin
Etudes are recommended. Practicing something that wasn't meant to be performed
is not only a waste of time but also destroys any sense of music you originally
had. We discuss all the major methods of memory, which empower the pianist to
perform feats that most people would expect only from "gifted musicians", such
as playing the composition in your head, away from the piano, or even writing
the entire composition from memory. If you can play every note in the
composition from memory, there is no reason why you can't write them all down!
Such abilities are not for show or bragging rights, but are essential for
performing without flubs or memory lapses and come almost as automatic
byproducts of these methods, even for us ordinary folks with ordinary memory.
Many students can play complete compositions but can't write them down or play
them in their minds -- such students have only partially memorized the
compositions in a manner that is insufficient for performances. Inadequate
memory and lack of confidence are the main causes of nervousness. They wonder
why they suffer stage fright and why performing flawlessly is such a daunting
task while Mozart could just sit down and play.

Another example of helpful knowledge is relaxation and the use of gravity. The
weight of the arm is important not only as a reference force for uniform and
even playing (gravity is always constant), but also for testing the level of
relaxation. The piano was designed with gravity as the reference force because
the human body evolved to match gravity exactly, which means that the force
needed to play the piano is about equal to the weight of the arm. When
performing difficult tasks, such as playing a challenging piano passage, the
natural tendency is to tense up so that the entire body becomes one contracted
mass of muscle. Trying to move the fingers independently and rapidly under such
conditions is like trying to run a sprint with rubber bands wrapped around both
legs. If you can relax all unnecessary muscles, and use only the required
muscles for just those instants at which they are needed, you can play
extremely fast, effortlessly, for long periods of time without fatigue, and
with more reserve strength than needed to produce the loudest sounds.

We will see that many “established teaching methods” are myths that can cause
untold misery to the student. Such myths survive because of a lack of rigorous
scientific scrutiny. These methods include: the curled finger position, thumb
under method of playing scales, most finger exercises, sitting high on the
chair, “no pain, no gain”, slowly ramping up your speed, and liberal use of the
metronome. We not only explain why they are harmful but also provide the
correct alternatives, which are, respectively: flat finger positions, thumb
over method, parallel sets (:ref:`II.11`, :ref:`III.7.b`), sitting lower on the
chair, relaxation, acquiring speed by understanding "speed walls"
(:ref:`III.7.i`) and identification of specific beneficial uses of the
metronome. Speed walls are encountered when you try to play a passage faster,
but reach a maximum speed beyond which the speed will not increase no matter
how hard you practice. What causes speed walls, how many are there, and how do
you avoid or eliminate them? Answers: speed walls are the results of attempts
to do the impossible (you erect speed walls yourself by using incorrect
practice methods), there are effectively an infinite number of them, and you
avoid them by using the correct practice methods. One way of avoiding speed
walls is not to build them in the first place, by knowing their causes (stress,
incorrect fingering or rhythm, lack of technique, practicing too fast,
practicing hands together [:ref:`II.25`] before you are ready, etc.). Another
way is to come down in speed from “infinite speed” by using the parallel sets
(:ref:`II.11`), instead of increasing the speed gradually. If you can start at
speeds above the speed wall, there is no speed wall when you come down in
speed.

This book frequently deals with one important point -- that the best piano
practice methods are surprisingly counter-intuitive. This point is paramount in
piano pedagogy because it is the main reason why the wrong practice methods
tend to be used by students and teachers. If they weren't so counter-intuitive,
this book may not have been necessary. Consequently, we deal not only with what
you should do but also with what you should not do. These negative sections are
not for criticizing those who use the wrong methods but are necessary
components of the learning process. The reason why intuition fails is that the
piano tasks are so complex, and there are so many ways to accomplish them, that
the probability of hitting the right method is nearly zero if you picked the
simplest, obvious ones. Here are four examples of counter-intuitive practice
methods:

#. Separating the hands for practice (:ref:`II.7`) is counter-intuitive because
   you need to practice each hand, then both together, so that it looks like you
   have to practice three times instead of just once hands together. Why practice
   hands separately, which you will never use in the end? Approximately 80% of
   this book deals with why you need to practice hands separately. Hands separate
   practice is the only way to rapidly increase speed and control without getting
   into trouble. It allows you to work hard 100% of the time at any speed without
   fatigue, stress, or injury because the method is based on switching hands as
   soon as the working hand begins to tire. Hands separate practice is the only
   way in which you can experiment to find the correct hand motions for speed and
   expression and it is the fastest way to learn how to relax. Trying to acquire
   technique hands together is the main cause of speed walls, bad habits, injury,
   and stress.
#. Practicing slowly hands together and gradually ramping up the speed is what
   we tend to do intuitively, but it turns out to be one of the worst ways to
   practice because it wastes so much time and you are training the hands to
   execute slow motions that are different from what you need at the final speed.
   Some students compound the problem by using the metronome as a constant guide
   to ramp up the speed or to keep the rhythm. This is one of the worst abuses of
   the metronome. Metronomes should be used only briefly to check the timing
   (speed and rhythm). If over used, it can lead to loss of your internal rhythm,
   loss of musicality, and bio-physical difficulties from over- exposure to rigid
   repetition (the brain can actually start to counteract the metronome click and
   you may either not hear the click or hear it at the wrong time). Technique for
   speed is acquired by discovering new hand motions, not by speeding up a slow
   motion; i.e., the hand motions for playing slowly and fast are different. This
   is why trying to speed up a slow motion leads to speed walls -- because you are
   trying to do the impossible. Speeding up a slow play is like asking a horse to
   speed up a walk to the speed of a gallop -- it can't. A horse must change from
   walk to trot to canter and then to gallop. If you force a horse to walk at the
   speed of a canter, it will hit a speed wall and will most likely injure itself
   by kicking its own hoofs to shreds.
#. In order to memorize well, and be able to perform well, you must practice
   slowly, even after the piece can be played easily at speed. This is
   counter-intuitive because you always perform at speed, so why practice slowly
   and waste so much time? Playing fast can be detrimental to performance as well
   as to memory. Playing fast can cause “fast play degradation”, and the best way
   to test your memory is to play slowly. Thus practicing the recital pieces at
   full speed on recital day will result in a poor performance. This is one of the
   most counter-intuitive rules and is therefore difficult to follow. How often
   have you heard the refrain, "I played awfully during my lesson although I
   played so well this morning."? Therefore, although much of this book is
   oriented towards learning to play at the correct speed, it is the proper use of
   slow play that is critical for accurate memorization and for performing without
   mistakes. However, practicing slowly is tricky because you should not practice
   slowly until you can play fast! Otherwise, you would have no idea if your slow
   play motion is right or wrong. This problem is solved by practicing hands
   separately and getting up to speed quickly. After you know the hand motions for
   fast play, you can practice slowly at any time.
#. Most people feel uncomfortable trying to memorize something they can't play,
   so they instinctively learn a piece first, and then try to memorize it. It
   turns out that you can save a lot of time by memorizing first and then
   practicing from memory (we are talking about technically challenging music that
   is too difficult to sight read). Moreover, for reasons explained in this book,
   those who memorize after learning the piece never succeed in memorizing well.
   They will be haunted forever by memory problems. Therefore, good memorizing
   methods must be an integral part of any practice procedure; memorizing is a
   necessity, not a luxury.

These four examples should give the reader some idea of what I mean by
counter-intuitive practice methods. What is surprising is that the majority of
good practice methods is counter- intuitive to most people. Fortunately, the
geniuses who came before us have found the better practice methods and you will
see them here.

Why does the fact, that the correct methods are counter-intuitive, lead to
disaster? Even students who learned the correct methods (but were never taught
what not to do) can drift back into intuitive methods simply because their
brains keep telling them that they should use the intuitive methods (that's the
definition of intuitive methods). This of course happens to teachers as well.
Parents fall for it every time! Thus mere parental involvement can sometimes be
counterproductive, because the parents must also be informed. This is why this
book makes every effort to identify, and to point out the follies of, the
intuitive methods. Thus many teachers discourage parental involvement unless
the parents can also attend the lessons. Left to their own devices, the
majority of students, teachers, and parents will gravitate towards the
intuitive (wrong) methods. This is the main reason why so many wrong methods
are taught today, and why students need informed teachers and proper textbooks.
All piano teachers should use a textbook that explains practice methods; this
will free them from having to teach the mechanics of practicing and allow them
to concentrate on music where the teachers are most needed. The parents should
also read the textbook because parents are most susceptible to the pitfalls of
intuitive methods.

Piano teachers generally fall into three categories: 

A. Private teachers who can't teach
B. Private teachers that are very good
C. Teachers at universities and conservatories

The last group is usually fairly good because they are in an environment in
which they must communicate with one another. They are able to quickly identify
the worst teaching methods and eliminate them. Unfortunately, most students at
conservatories are already quite advanced and so it is too late to teach them
basic practice methods. The (A) group of teachers consists mainly of
individuals that do not communicate well with other teachers and invariably use
mostly intuitive methods; this explains why they can't teach. By choosing only
teachers that have web sites, you can eliminate many of the poor teachers
because these have at least learned to communicate. Groups (B) and (C) are
fairly familiar with the correct practice methods, though few know all of them
because there has not been a standardized textbook; on the other hand, most of
them know a lot of useful details that aren't in this book. There are precious
few group (B) type teachers and the group (C) teachers generally accept only
advanced students. The problem with this situation is that most students start
with the group (A) teachers and never progress beyond novice or intermediate
level and therefore never qualify for the group (C) teachers. Thus the majority
of beginner students give up in frustration although practically all of them
have the potential to become accomplished musicians. Moreover, this lack of
progress feeds the general misconception that learning piano is a lifetime of
fruitless efforts, which discourages the majority of parents and youngsters
from considering piano lessons.

There is an intimate relationship between music and mathematics. Music, in many
respects, is a form of mathematics and the great composers explored and
exploited this relationship. Most basic theories of music can be expressed
using mathematical terms. Harmony is a series of ratios, and harmony gives rise
to the chromatic scale, which is a logarithmic equation. Most music scales are
subsets of the chromatic scale, and chord progressions are the simplest
relationships among these subsets. I discuss some concrete examples of the use
of mathematics in some of the most famous compositions (:ref:`IV.4`) and
include all the topics for future music research (mathematical or otherwise) in
Section IV. It does not make sense to ask whether music is art or math; they
are both properties of music. Math is simply a way of measuring something
quantitatively; therefore, anything in music that can be quantified (such as
time signature, thematic structure, etc.) can be treated mathematically. Thus,
although math is not necessary to an artist, music and mathematics are
inseparably intertwined and a knowledge of these relationships can often be
useful (as demonstrated by every great composer), and will become more useful
as mathematical understanding of music progressively catches up to music and as
artists learn to take advantage of mathematics. Art is a shortcut way of using
the human brain to achieve results not achievable in any other way. Scientific
approaches to music only deal with the simpler levels of music that can be
analytically treated: science supports art. It is wrong to assume that science
will eventually replace art or, on the other extreme, that art is all you need
for music; art should be free to incorporate anything that the artist desires,
and science can provide invaluable help.

Too many pianists are ignorant of how the piano works and what it means to tune
in the temperaments, or what it means to voice the piano. This is especially
surprising because piano maintenance directly affects the ability to make music
and technical development. There are many concert pianists who do not know the
difference between Equal and Well temperaments (:ref:`CH2.2`) while some of
the compositions they are playing (e.g. Chopin, Bach) formally require the use
of one or the other. When to use electronic pianos, when to change to a higher
quality (grand) piano, and how to recognize quality in a piano are critical
decisions in the career of any pianist. Therefore, this book contains a section
on piano selection and a chapter on how to tune your own piano. Just as
electronic pianos are already always in tune, acoustic pianos must soon become
permanently in tune, for example, by using the thermal expansion coefficient of
the strings to electronically tune the piano (see Gilmore, `Self-Tuning Piano
<http://home.kc.rr.com/eromlignod/>`_). Today, practically all home pianos are
out of tune almost all the time because it starts to go out of tune the moment
the tuner leaves your house or if the room temperature or humidity changes.
That's an unacceptable situation. In future pianos, you will flick a switch and
the piano will tune itself in seconds. When mass produced, the cost of
self-tuning options will be small compared to the price of a quality piano. You
might think that this would put piano tuners out of work but that will not be
the case because the number of pianos will increase (because of this book), the
self-tuning mechanism requires maintenance and, for pianos in such perfect
tune, frequent hammer voicing and regulation (that are too often neglected
today) will make a significant improvement in musical output. This higher level
of maintenance will be demanded by the increasing number of advanced pianists.
You might suddenly realize that it was the piano, not you, that limited
technical development and musical output (worn hammers will do it every time!).
Why do you think concert pianists are so fussy about their pianos?

In summary, this book represents an unique event in the history of piano
pedagogy and is revolutionizing piano teaching. Surprisingly, there is little
that is fundamentally new in this book. We owe most of the major concepts to
Yvonne (Combe), Franz, Freddie, Ludwig, Wolfie, Johann, etc. Yvonne and Franz
gave us hands separate practice, segmental practice and relaxation; Franz and
Freddie gave us the “Thumb Over” method and freed us from Hanon and Czerny;
Wolfie taught us memorization and mental play; Johann knew all about parallel
sets, quiet hands (:ref:`III.6.l`), and the importance of musical practice, and
they all showed us (especially Ludwig) the relationships between math and
music. The enormous amounts of time and effort that were wasted in the past,
re- inventing the wheel and futilely repeating finger exercises with every
generation of pianist, staggers the imagination. By making the knowledge in
this book available to the student from day one of piano lessons, we are
ushering in a new era in learning to play the piano. This book is not the end
of the road -- it is just a beginning. Future research into practice methods
will undoubtedly uncover improvements; that's the nature of the scientific
approach. It guarantees that we will never again lose useful information, that
we will always make forward progress, and that every teacher will have access
to the best available information. We still do not understand the biological
changes that accompany the acquisition of technique and how the human
(especially the infant) brain develops. Understanding these will allow us to
directly address them instead of having to repeat something 10,000 times. Since
the time of Bach, piano pedagogy had been in a state of arrested development;
we can now hope to transform piano playing from a dream that seemed mostly out
of reach to an art that everyone can now enjoy.

This book is my gift to society. The translators have also contributed their
precious time. Together, we are pioneering a web based approach for providing
free education of the highest caliber, something that will hopefully become the
wave of the future. There is no reason why education can't be free. Such a
revolution might seem to put some teachers' jobs in jeopardy, but with improved
learning methods, piano playing will become more popular, creating a greater
demand for teachers who can teach, because students will always learn faster
under a good teacher. The economic impact of this improved learning method can
be significant. This book was first printed in 1994 and the web site was
started in 1999. Since then, I estimate that over 10,000 students had learned
this method by year 2002. Let's assume that 10,000 serious piano students save
5 hours/week using these methods, that they practice 40 weeks/year, and that
their time is worth $5/hour; then the total yearly savings are:

.. math::

   \frac{5\text{ hours / week}}{\text{student}}\times \frac{40\text{ weeks}}{\text{year}}\times\frac{\$5}{\text{hour}} \times{10{,}000\text{ students}}=\frac{\$10{,}000{,}000}{\text{year}}

in 2002, which will increase every year, or

.. math::

   \frac{\$1{,}000}{\text{year}} \text{ per student}

$10M/yr is only the savings of the students; we have not included the effects
on teachers and the piano and music industries. Whenever adoption of scientific
methods produced such leaps in efficiency, the field has historically
flourished, seemingly without limit, and benefited everyone. With a world
population over 6.6B today (2007), we can expect the pianist population to
eventually exceed 1% or over 66M, so that the potential economic impact of this
book could exceed several $B/year. Such huge economic benefits in any sector
have historically been an unstoppable force, and this engine will drive the
coming piano revolution. This book is the beginning of that revolution. More
importantly, music and any gain in the development of a young child’s mind, are
priceless.
